README.md, before:

# HTTPTests

> Automated HTTP integration testing for GitHub Actions with Docker isolation

Test your APIs, proxies, and microservices in CI/CD with zero configuration. HTTPTests automatically discovers test suites, spins up Docker environments, and validates your HTTP services.

[![GitHub Action](https://img.shields.io/badge/GitHub-Action-blue?logo=github)](https://github.com/marketplace/actions/httptests-runner)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

## Features

- **Zero Configuration** - Drop a `.httptests` folder in your repo and go
- **Auto-Discovery** - Automatically finds and runs all test suites in your repository
- **Docker Isolated** - Each test suite runs in its own isolated Docker environment
- **Multi-Service** - Test complex setups with proxies, APIs, and mock services
- **CI Ready** - Built specifically for GitHub Actions workflows
- **Detailed Output** - Clear test results with assertion counts and validation details

## Quick Start

### 1. Add a test suite to your repository

Create a `.httptests` directory with two files:

**`.httptests/config.yml`**
```yaml
mock:
  network_aliases:
    - backend

nginx:
  environment:
    ENV_VAR: value
```

**`.httptests/test.json`**
```json
{
  "hosts": {
    "api.example.com": [
      {
        "paths": ["/health"],
        "method": "GET",
        "expectedStatus": 200,
        "expectedResponseHeaders": [
          ["Content-Type", "application/json"]
        ]
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

### 2. Add a Dockerfile for your service

Place a `Dockerfile` in the same directory as `.httptests`:

```dockerfile
FROM nginx:alpine
COPY nginx.conf /etc/nginx/nginx.conf
EXPOSE 80
CMD ["nginx", "-g", "daemon off;"]
```

### 3. Add GitHub Action workflow

**`.github/workflows/test.yml`**
```yaml
name: HTTPTests
on: [push, pull_request]

jobs:
  test:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v4
      - uses: serviceguards-com/httptests-action@v1
```

That's it! Your HTTP integration tests will now run on every push and pull request.

## Use Cases

### API Testing
Test REST APIs, GraphQL endpoints, and webhooks with comprehensive assertions on status codes, headers, and response bodies.

### Nginx/Proxy Validation
Validate reverse proxy configurations, header transformations, routing rules, and upstream forwarding behavior.

### Microservices Testing
Test service-to-service communication, load balancing, service discovery, and API gateway configurations.

### Load Balancer Testing
Verify load balancer behavior, health checks, failover scenarios, and request distribution.

## Why HTTPTests?

| Feature | HTTPTests | curl scripts | Postman/Newman | Custom Framework |
|---------|-----------|--------------|----------------|------------------|
| **Setup Time** | < 5 minutes | Manual | 15-30 minutes | Hours |
| **Docker Isolation** | ✅ Built-in | ❌ Manual | ❌ Manual | ❌ Manual |
| **Auto-Discovery** | ✅ Yes | ❌ No | ❌ No | ⚠️ Maybe |
| **Multi-Service** | ✅ Yes | ⚠️ Complex | ⚠️ Limited | ⚠️ Custom |
| **CI Integration** | ✅ Native | ⚠️ Manual | ✅ Yes | ⚠️ Custom |
| **Learning Curve** | Low | Low | Medium | High |

## Real-World Example

```
=== Processing suite: ./api-service/.httptests ===
Running tests for httptests-api-service
test_endpoints (__main__.IntegrationTests.test_endpoints) ... ok
  → Testing: GET api.example.com/health
    ✓ Status code: 200 (expected 200)
    ✓ Response header: content-type = application/json
  → Testing: GET api.example.com/users
    ✓ Status code: 200 (expected 200)
    ✓ Request header forwarded: x-forwarded-for
    ✓ Request header: x-api-version = v1
============================================================
Total assertions passed: 5
============================================================
```

## Documentation

- **[Quick Start Guide](TECHNICAL.md)** - Detailed setup and configuration
- **[Examples Repository](https://github.com/serviceguards-com/httptests-example)** - Real-world examples for different use cases
- **[Test Configuration](TECHNICAL.md#test-configuration-format)** - Complete `test.json` reference
- **[Docker Setup](TECHNICAL.md#configuration-format)** - `config.yml` options

## Examples

Explore real-world examples in the [httptests-example repository](https://github.com/serviceguards-com/httptests-example):

- **[API Testing](https://github.com/serviceguards-com/httptests-example/tree/main/api-testing)** - REST API with CRUD operations
- **[Nginx Proxy](https://github.com/serviceguards-com/httptests-example/tree/main/nginx-proxy)** - Reverse proxy with header transformation
- **[Microservices](https://github.com/serviceguards-com/httptests-example/tree/main/microservices)** - Multi-service communication testing
- **[API Gateway](https://github.com/serviceguards-com/httptests-example/tree/main/api-gateway)** - Auth, rate limiting, and routing

## Advanced Features

### Multiple Test Suites
HTTPTests automatically discovers and runs all `.httptests` directories:

```
repo/
├── service-a/.httptests/
├── service-b/.httptests/
└── service-c/.httptests/
```

Each suite runs in isolation with its own Docker environment.

### Collection Headers
Define headers once, use them in all tests:

```json
{
  "collectionHeaders": [
    ["X-Request-Id"],
    ["Authorization"]
  ],
  "hosts": {
    "api.example.com": [...]
  }
}
```

### Request/Response Validation
Test status codes, response headers, and upstream request headers:

```json
{
  "paths": ["/api/users"],
  "expectedStatus": 200,
  "expectedResponseHeaders": [
    ["Content-Type", "application/json"]
  ],
  "expectedRequestHeadersToUpstream": [
    ["X-Forwarded-For"],
    ["X-Real-IP"]
  ]
}
```

## Configuration

### Inputs

| Input | Description | Required | Default |
|-------|-------------|----------|---------|
| `working-directory` | Directory to scan for `.httptests` folders | No | `.` |
| `python-version` | Python version for test runner | No | `3.x` |

### Example with options

```yaml
- uses: serviceguards-com/httptests-action@v1
  with:
    working-directory: ./services
    python-version: '3.11'
```

## Requirements

- **GitHub Actions runner**: `ubuntu-latest` recommended
- **Docker**: Available on GitHub's Ubuntu runners by default
- **Services**: Must have a `Dockerfile` in the parent directory of `.httptests`

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please check out our [Contributing Guide](CONTRIBUTING.md).

## License

MIT License - see [LICENSE](LICENSE) for details.

## Support

- **Issues**: [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/serviceguards-com/httptests-action/issues)
- **Documentation**: [Technical Docs](TECHNICAL.md)
- **Examples**: [httptests-example repository](https://github.com/serviceguards-com/httptests-example)

---

Made with ❤️ for developers who value automated testing

Commit message:

feat: Add service health checks and improve error logging
- Add automatic service health check with configurable timeout
- Enhance error messages with detailed context and troubleshooting steps
- Add automatic container log dumps on test failures
- Improve progress indicators with visual feedback
- Add --wait-timeout and --skip-health-check CLI options
- Fix connection refused errors by waiting for service readiness
- Add 10s timeout to all HTTP requests

Fixes connection refused errors and provides better debugging experience.

README.md, after:

# HTTPTests

> Automated HTTP integration testing for GitHub Actions with Docker isolation

Test your APIs, proxies, and microservices in CI/CD with zero configuration. HTTPTests automatically discovers test suites, spins up Docker environments, and validates your HTTP services.

[![GitHub Action](https://img.shields.io/badge/GitHub-Action-blue?logo=github)](https://github.com/marketplace/actions/httptests-runner)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

## Features

- **Zero Configuration** - Drop a `.httptests` folder in your repo and go
- **Auto-Discovery** - Automatically finds and runs all test suites in your repository
- **Docker Isolated** - Each test suite runs in its own isolated Docker environment
- **Multi-Service** - Test complex setups with proxies, APIs, and mock services
- **CI Ready** - Built specifically for GitHub Actions workflows
- **Detailed Output** - Clear test results with assertion counts and validation details

## Quick Start

### 1. Add a test suite to your repository

Create a `.httptests` directory with two files:

**`.httptests/config.yml`**
```yaml
mock:
  network_aliases:
    - backend

nginx:
  environment:
    ENV_VAR: value
```

**`.httptests/test.json`**
```json
{
  "hosts": {
    "api.example.com": [
      {
        "paths": ["/health"],
        "method": "GET",
        "expectedStatus": 200,
        "expectedResponseHeaders": [
          ["Content-Type", "application/json"]
        ]
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

### 2. Add a Dockerfile for your service

Place a `Dockerfile` in the same directory as `.httptests`:

```dockerfile
FROM nginx:alpine
COPY nginx.conf /etc/nginx/nginx.conf
EXPOSE 80
CMD ["nginx", "-g", "daemon off;"]
```

### 3. Add GitHub Action workflow

**`.github/workflows/test.yml`**
```yaml
name: HTTPTests
on: [push, pull_request]

jobs:
  test:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v4
      - uses: serviceguards-com/httptests-action@v1
```

That's it! Your HTTP integration tests will now run on every push and pull request.

## Use Cases

### API Testing
Test REST APIs, GraphQL endpoints, and webhooks with comprehensive assertions on status codes, headers, and response bodies.

### Nginx/Proxy Validation
Validate reverse proxy configurations, header transformations, routing rules, and upstream forwarding behavior.

### Microservices Testing
Test service-to-service communication, load balancing, service discovery, and API gateway configurations.

### Load Balancer Testing
Verify load balancer behavior, health checks, failover scenarios, and request distribution.

## Why HTTPTests?

| Feature | HTTPTests | curl scripts | Postman/Newman | Custom Framework |
|---------|-----------|--------------|----------------|------------------|
| **Setup Time** | < 5 minutes | Manual | 15-30 minutes | Hours |
| **Docker Isolation** | ✅ Built-in | ❌ Manual | ❌ Manual | ❌ Manual |
| **Auto-Discovery** | ✅ Yes | ❌ No | ❌ No | ⚠️ Maybe |
| **Multi-Service** | ✅ Yes | ⚠️ Complex | ⚠️ Limited | ⚠️ Custom |
| **CI Integration** | ✅ Native | ⚠️ Manual | ✅ Yes | ⚠️ Custom |
| **Learning Curve** | Low | Low | Medium | High |

## Real-World Example

```
=== Processing suite: ./api-service/.httptests ===
📦 Starting Docker services...
🧪 Running tests for httptests-api-service

🔍 Waiting for service to be ready (max 60s)...
  Attempt 1: Service not ready yet (2.0s elapsed)...
  Attempt 2: Service not ready yet (4.1s elapsed)...
✓ Service is ready! (took 5.2s)

test_endpoints (__main__.IntegrationTests.test_endpoints) ... ok
  → Testing: GET api.example.com/health
    ✓ Status code: 200 (expected 200)
    ✓ Response header: content-type = application/json
  → Testing: GET api.example.com/users
    ✓ Status code: 200 (expected 200)
    ✓ Request header forwarded: x-forwarded-for
    ✓ Request header: x-api-version = v1
============================================================
Total assertions passed: 5
============================================================
🧹 Cleaning up Docker services...
```

## Documentation

- **[Quick Start Guide](TECHNICAL.md)** - Detailed setup and configuration
- **[Examples Repository](https://github.com/serviceguards-com/httptests-example)** - Real-world examples for different use cases
- **[Test Configuration](TECHNICAL.md#test-configuration-format)** - Complete `test.json` reference
- **[Docker Setup](TECHNICAL.md#configuration-format)** - `config.yml` options

## Examples

Explore real-world examples in the [httptests-example repository](https://github.com/serviceguards-com/httptests-example):

- **[API Testing](https://github.com/serviceguards-com/httptests-example/tree/main/api-testing)** - REST API with CRUD operations
- **[Nginx Proxy](https://github.com/serviceguards-com/httptests-example/tree/main/nginx-proxy)** - Reverse proxy with header transformation
- **[Microservices](https://github.com/serviceguards-com/httptests-example/tree/main/microservices)** - Multi-service communication testing
- **[API Gateway](https://github.com/serviceguards-com/httptests-example/tree/main/api-gateway)** - Auth, rate limiting, and routing

## Advanced Features

### Multiple Test Suites
HTTPTests automatically discovers and runs all `.httptests` directories:

```
repo/
├── service-a/.httptests/
├── service-b/.httptests/
└── service-c/.httptests/
```

Each suite runs in isolation with its own Docker environment.

### Collection Headers
Define headers once, use them in all tests:

```json
{
  "collectionHeaders": [
    ["X-Request-Id"],
    ["Authorization"]
  ],
  "hosts": {
    "api.example.com": [...]
  }
}
```

### Request/Response Validation
Test status codes, response headers, and upstream request headers:

```json
{
  "paths": ["/api/users"],
  "expectedStatus": 200,
  "expectedResponseHeaders": [
    ["Content-Type", "application/json"]
  ],
  "expectedRequestHeadersToUpstream": [
    ["X-Forwarded-For"],
    ["X-Real-IP"]
  ]
}
```

## Configuration

### Inputs

| Input | Description | Required | Default |
|-------|-------------|----------|---------|
| `working-directory` | Directory to scan for `.httptests` folders | No | `.` |
| `python-version` | Python version for test runner | No | `3.x` |

### Example with options

```yaml
- uses: serviceguards-com/httptests-action@v1
  with:
    working-directory: ./services
    python-version: '3.11'
```

## Requirements

- **GitHub Actions runner**: `ubuntu-latest` recommended
- **Docker**: Available on GitHub's Ubuntu runners by default
- **Services**: Must have a `Dockerfile` in the parent directory of `.httptests`

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please check out our [Contributing Guide](CONTRIBUTING.md).

## License

MIT License - see [LICENSE](LICENSE) for details.

## Support

- **Issues**: [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/serviceguards-com/httptests-action/issues)
- **Documentation**: [Technical Docs](TECHNICAL.md)
- **Examples**: [httptests-example repository](https://github.com/serviceguards-com/httptests-example)

---

Made with ❤️ for developers who value automated testing
